i am hesitant  to use the word paradigm paradigm is one  of those painfully overused words  especially in newspapers in our time  but mental illness is really a very  misleading  paradigm you know  and people are drawn to it  and people like to speak about  themselves in terms of mental health and  mental illness and like to speak about  others in terms of mental health and  mental illness  because it brings with it  the pleasing illusion  that the behavior you're exhibiting  right now or the behavior you're  exhibiting in the depths of your despair  that's not who you really are  that's just an apparition that's just an  illusion it's just a  misleading set of behaviors created by  these  short-term circumstances  and once you recover your so-called  mental health right once you recover  from this imaginary  injury then  then people will see  who you really are and that's  that's somebody else  now  there's always a crisis in your life  there's always some  short-term excuse for why your mental  health is impaired why you're not  acting  as as yourself as your true self as this  other person you think you are but it's  so much more useful and it's so much  more honest  to instead look at how you cope with  those crises and say this is  who you really are  you know and there isn't a contrast  between  mental health and mental illness  now  i think you guys are aware i've made a  few different youtube videos speaking at  length and speaking  in depth  about my old colleague and my old  adversary  aaron janus now let me ask you  i do not think  aaron janus  is insane  i do not think aaron janus has any of  the currently fashionable uh diagnosable  conditions  and if you really look at the history of  the concept of being in a manic state in  a fugue state in the videos that have  emerged of her ranting in this way i  would not describe that as mania  i would not uh describe it as a feud  state i don't think she's in a  disassociative state so on and so forth  you know how i look at aaron  i look at her behaving this way  and i know how she's behaved i know  she's talked to me  directly over many years  and i say  yeah  that's who she really is  you know that's who she is  and i don't mean that it's some kind of  negative judgment like this is who  you're always going to be and you can't  grow or you can't change  i needed the positive sense of  that's who she is  like maybe you can love her  maybe you can work with her  maybe you can be her friend or her  colleague whatever your situation is  right  and maybe you can't but you've got to  accept this is who she is these aren't  extreme or aberrant behaviors caused by  some kind of short-term illness that  she's going to recover from it's not the  case that she's been poisoned it's not  the case that she's hallucinating  because of some kind of drug she doesn't  have a concussion  that's who she really  is now  i used to be married i'm now happily  divorced let me tell you  i saw this and how other people  treated my ex-wife  how they perceived her  and how they refused to let themselves  perceive her for who she really is how  they were kind of disregarding the  evidence of who she was all the time and  there's always a short-term excuse i  mean give a good example  uh max wife got pregnant had a baby so i  shouldn't say got pregnant we quite  intentionally had a baby it was a  planned an intentional pregnancy  english language is funny that way i  got pregnant it's a little bit too vague  anyway and you know uh i remember how  she was behaving right after she she had  the baby and there were people that said  oh oh oh this is  postpartum depression  and like i can't i can't remember  fighting with someone about like i don't  remember it ever really being a conflict  or anything but i'm already saying  people  what do you mean  this is who she really is like she's  like this  all the time i'm being real i'm not  complaining i'm not like like after she  had the baby  her behavior how she act now  it was the same as during the pregnancy  and before she had the baby this is the  same person i've known for all these  years we had a long very close  relationship so we lived together and  worked together some couples they spent  time  this is someone i really live with and  work with very closely for many years i  knew who she was  and i felt like when other people were  making these excuses for her  one  they were  demonstrating  that they don't know  who she really is and two they were  demonstrating why they would never know  who she really is like  she's showing you again and again  who she is and you're telling yourself  like oh this is just a mental health  problem you know and think about the  dichotomy that's there  you're imagining there are two different  people  one is the person as she behaves  when she's mentally healthy  and the other is the person that she  behaves when she's mentally impaired  now  in the real world  if you get bitten by a venomous snake  many many types of snake venom will  miraculously bring out a totally  different character totally different  set of behaviors in you when your body  is fighting the venom you're in this  sort of altered state of mind  i can see when i was on malaria  medication  medication for malaria probably changed  my personality a little bit  there can be short-term circumstances  don't come out that really do impair  your cognitive function or change your  character change your babe there are uh  i'm not making this as some kind of  universal claim that under no  circumstances can we talk about a  contrast between being ill and being  healthy oh look you know i used to live  in the tropics i've lived in cambodia  laos thailand and so on you can have a  tropical fever and just the fever itself  i mean  you'd be amazed you can hallucinate due  to fever you can really be in this sense  you can have a mental health problem  because you got a fever  you know so you're not yourself this is  not your real character structural paper  okay it exists  but what we've done is as a culture on a  massive scale we've adopted this  unexamined preconception that lets us go  around discounting  the evidence before our eyes when people  are telling us who they really are when  people are showing us who they really  are again and again and again now  i had a whole bunch of emails from  someone  named daniel i'm just gonna use his  first name i assumed he wanted to remain  anonymous and this guy was writing to me  at on the internet you don't know what's  true and what's false i have no way to  verify this but he was writing to me  claiming to be a personal friend of  aaron janus and a personal supporter and  it sounds like some kind of counselor or  he's somehow  trying to help her with i  only know what he tells me and i'm not  saying any of this to ridicule by the  way there's someone who and but on the  internet you don't know what's real you  know so i have no way to verify this and  he says that he really thinks it would  be for the best for  aaron janus  if i were to delete  these videos of her showing  how she behaves  how she acts and again from my  perspective  i don't believe aaron janice was bitten  by a venomous snake  i don't believe she had a fever  and i've known aaron for a lot of years  daniel i've fetched this to you an email  all right i know aaron aaron knows me  you can debate whether or not i know her  well  maybe maybe i'm wrong you know  but i'm telling you you know  this is who aaron really is now  he threw a lot of hypotheticals at me  don't worry this is this is a brief i'm  not gonna  i'm not gonna  rehash the whole email correspondence  i'm not going to try to summarize and uh  and reiterate everything on both sides  but you know one of his tactics was to  say to me that if the positions were  reversed  i would want someone else to delete a  video that criticized me in this way or  that showed footage of me in this way  the totally reasonable tactic from views  like  whether you think of this as socratic  method or something whatever method you  want to call this alkabiati's method  thucydides method why is it always going  to be socratic method aren't there some  other names from ancient athens we could  use  all right  whatever pretentious ancient greek name  you want to use this as a method that's  totally fine  but i think he wasn't willing to really  hear  my answer because i answer i took that  as a sincere question or a sincere  challenge  and i i you know i answered sincerely no  i would have valued  this kind of criticism so much in my  life i would have valued this so i still  today i would but when i was younger it  could have made an even bigger  difference in my life positively  to hear this kind of thing like no no  what you're like it's fine for you to  ask this question how would i feel  someone christmas but i'm saying no i i  crave this kind of criticism this kind  of cross-examination this this kind of  challenge and  guys  i was born stupid okay i was born  ignorant all right what you see on  camera right now i built it up brick by  brick over years of hard work i did not  come out of the womb gifted this way i  didn't and i was born with terrible  religious preconceptions about the world  that i had to destroy  supernatural preconceptual and terrible  economic and political preconceptions  about the world that i had to destroy so  it's not just that i had to learn things  i had to also unlearn things challenged  my instructions  as a complete coincidence you know i  went over to catherine klein's channel  so if you guys don't know these names  nobody you can understand this video  without knowing the names of any of the  people catherine klein i hadn't seen her  youtube channel for a while and one of  my fans sent me a message and said hey  look you should criticize with kevin  clanston  i sent katherine klein and i shared this  on patreon from my perspective these are  100 positive  100 friendly messages  but  no matter how positive and how friendly  you try to be the reality is i'm  communicating her the point that she's  talking about economics and she very  fundamentally does not understand the  science of economics not at a high  school level not at a university 101  textbook level like  and i as nicely as i could i tried to  say to her look  you're actually taking political  hyperbole  and propaganda  and you're repeating it like as if it's  scientific fact like that's what's  that's what's going on here i said as  nice as you could  now someone like daniel could say to me  it's totally reasonable like whether you  think this is socratic method or not  totally reasonable to challenge me and  say hey  you wouldn't like it if someone said  that to you  but you're wrong  i would value that so much still today  today it would have to be in a pretty  high level of every edition for someone  to challenge me whether it's on  economics or ancient greece or wrong but  when i was younger i mean i was just  stupid when i was 17 that was as stupid  as every other 17 year old i was 19 i  was as stupid as every other 19 year old  when i was 22  starting to get ahead  but trust me like i i i'm cursed with a  very accurate memory of how stupid i was  i know the extent to which  some of the stupid things catherine  klein is saying today i said in the past  you know the distant past some of these  misconceptions  were inculcated into me and i was raised  with them and i had to challenge them  and it would have meant so much to me  positively if someone else anyone else  had challenged my ignorance to challenge  my preconception if they had helped me  even if  from an outside perspective maybe  someone would see they're helping me as  a kind of cruelty because some people  they regard all criticism  as cruelty all criticism is having bad  intentions but i don't  that that's i don't see the world that  way i don't see my myself that way  you know  um  this guy daniel has written to me  uh demanding that i delete those videos  of aaron janus and he's conceded the  point this is i think significant  that  my monologue so me speaking on camera  what i'm saying is actually useful and  is helpful that there isn't something  that needs to be censored or deleted  there he just wants me to delete  the portions of the video that show  aaron herself shall we say ranting  on camera okay  but what's so important of that right  i'm gonna tell you several things that  are so important about that the first  thing i'd tell you that's so important  for that is  that's  who  she really  is daniel  and i think that's very hard  for you  to accept and that's why you don't feel  comfortable watching that  i'm not saying that to insult you  you want to think  who she really is is another person  right  it's like if you have an uncle who's an  alcoholic  and when he's drunk you tell yourself oh  this isn't who he really is he's really  a nice guy he's really a good guy  he just happens to be drunk all the time  no  that's who he really is you don't have  two separate people there right  you know he's your uncle chose to get  drunk now he's drunk he's a drunk that's  your uncle you know that's that's who he  is you have to accept that right so  one important factor is just that  quality of getting people to face up to  this  and look let me just say  reflecting back on my marriage  reflecting back on the  numerous  conversations i had  with my ex-wife where she was  screaming at me and being totally  irrational and totally abusive you know  nothing could have helped her more  than if i had videotaped that  even if only one other person ever saw  the videotape even if just the next day  or the next week  i'd sat down with her and played the  videotape so she could see it and she  could see hey  this is who i really am and in her case  sir telling my ex-wife this is how  you treat your husband this is how you  treat a man who has loved you and  supported you and has tolerated endured  a huge amount of this kind of abuse  for years and he's sacrificed so much  for you and this is how you treat him  now because i think there's a very real  sense in which my ex-wife like couldn't  remember that or couldn't see it with  detachment  or couldn't accept  like those were really her words those  were really her deeds this is who she  really is and this is what i'm really  this is what her husband is really  coping with right  seeing that on camera  for the person themselves  daniel you may feel that that's only  hurtful you may feel that that's only  harmful i'm telling you  i don't see it that way okay i have wept  on camera keep watching my youtube  channel you can see me breakdown weeping  okay uh my girlfriend and i have broken  down weeping together on camera actually  at least once maybe twice i forget you  know and you know again like it's fine  if it's on a kind of socratic dialogue  level of challenging me it's fine for  you to challenge me it's fine for you to  ask me like oh well wouldn't you feel  terrible if there was something like you  about this  but my answer is no i think that's  something that would be really helpful  for me  i think it's something that's really  helpful for my ex-wife i think it's  helpful for basically everyone i've  known who could go through frankly sorry  uh i could talk about my own father here  also my father is now deceased  but it would have been helpful for him  to see himself on video and to be in my  father's case one of the main things to  do is confront him with the extent to  which he's lying  it's very hard someone who's a liar a  habitual liar to sh to prove their  dishonesty to them is very difficult  they'll insist you and my father excuse  me he didn't sit you know i never said  that or i said this instead i had my  father i'm sure one of the times my  father broke down weeping i remember he  always insisted me that he'd never  broken down  like he never cried in front of me  it's psychotic what can i do let me say  that's who he really is  [Laughter]  my father didn't have a mental health  problem okay  that that's who he really was you know  um  he's someone who would lie to your face  and say that he'd never broken down  weeping and he really you know  he lied about everything and  you know it would be so valuable with  someone like that if you could have  videotape  and then go back oh no but look this is  what you said five years ago this is  what you said five months ago whatever  it is and look what you're saying now  look how different your memory of it is  or what you're saying now can you see  the problem can you admit yourself  what's going on  [Music]  you know we've got to scale this up  so far i've been talking about  one-on-one face-to-face relationships  you know my relationship with my  ex-wife my relationship with my father  and i don't know anything about your  relationship with aaron daniel i just  don't know uh i assume daniel wanted  this all to be private  so  i've been treated as private he now  tells me that he is quote the king of  social media that he is quote a  multi-preneur that he's hired by big  companies i don't know what he does on  the internet but  apparently he he says he's a big famous  person on social media interesting to  hear so and he's invited me he's  encouraged me to share all of our email  correspondence publicly which i'm not  gonna do uh because i think that could  be  harmful to you daniel and i think it  could be harmful to aaron janus also  just being wrong with you and also i  don't even know what's true and what's  false and what should be me i know  what's true in the emails i write i can  share my emails because i know i'm  telling the truth you know no offense  but anyone can write to me on the  internet and claim they know aaron janus  i can't uh  i can't verify that way okay  so  so far i've just talked about one-on-one  relationships including the unknown  relationship between daniel and aaron  but we're assuming daniel is some guy  who is somehow trying to counsel or help  aaron as a friend  aaron janus is a political leader  and she's been a political leader  in several different movements  so daniel i don't know if you're aware  of aaron's period of trying to be a  political leader in the atheist movement  specifically in the anti-christian  atheist movement  [Music]  not just the vegan movement  we also have this example of the  of the atheism now you also have you  know her career and involvement in in  music  you know just digress to say here you  know  i remember talking to erin  years ago  and she told me that she really  regards prince the recording artist  prince the artist formerly known as  prince that she regarded prince as a  kind of uh  hero as someone she compared herself to  so much she felt she had a lot in common  with you know um and i didn't say this  to her at the time but i thought wow i  wonder if she's like aware  that prince was this extremely eccentric  guy  but and you know also  prince was very messed up about religion  by the way  and you know but he managed to be  successful and should really get ahead  of music  despite these eccentricities  i remember wondering did she choose  prince as a kind of role model as an  example someone who was a successful  musician while coping with you know um  eccentricities  uh shall we say you know  if you take the view that there aren't  two different people called aaron janus  one of whom is mentally healthy and one  of whom millionaire if you just accept  all of this behavior as one of the same  person and say that's who she really is  footnote she can change  if if you knew me when i was 18  all right i had a lot of aberrant  behavior 18 it's disappeared from my  life but that's who i really was i was  an 18 year old struggling with all the  problems i had and i i did progress i  did change but it wasn't wasn't there  were two different people there one of  whom was traumatized or bitten by a  snake or in some kind of altered state  of mind i'm almost was the real me you  know it's it's all the real me okay  if you take all this behavior together  all this evidence together you accept  this is who she really is you know what  maybe she can be  a successful musician maybe she can be a  successful artist and maybe you daniel  maybe you can love her  and support her in that  and  you know in a completely non-medical  sense of the word crazy  there were a lot of crazy people in the  recording recorded music industry you  can be pretty crazy and and you know you  can be very eccentric or a little bit  crazy and you can do fine in in the  music industry i i had one friend i'm  just gonna choose to not say who this is  and he was actually getting into radio  broadcasting  long story  he had a history of being a drug addict  and i remember saying to him positively  to to encourage him i said well you know  you've chosen to go into one of the few  industries  where a huge percentage of people have a  history with cocaine like a huge your  co-worker and your boss  whether or not they call themselves an  addict or a recovered addict those  people are not afraid of cocaine and  they won't be afraid to work with you so  he was getting into uh radio production  radio broadcasting whatever you want to  say didn't last  [Laughter]  it's another long story what actually  what actually happened that guy um  but you know of course there are plenty  of lines of work where instead  being a little bit eccentric being a  little bit crazy or having a history  with cocaine and that guy's good well  that would be a huge insuperable problem  okay  but whatever you guys are gonna do  together you know what i mean it has to  start  from that acceptance  of this is who you really are  and i think even that notion that that  you can change it doesn't make sense  without first that  that acceptance  um  [Music]  aaron janus  has been  one of the most famous  the most highly funded  the most influential leaders  in the vegan movement  in the last 10 years  you use a round number  okay  now  people have worked with aaron  people have started projects with aaron  people have donated money to support  aaron people have received update emails  from her talking about  film projects and music projects and  political projects things related to  veganism and by the way i assume i could  repeat all this again with her  involvement in the atheist movement or  anti-christian movement you know uh you  know but that side of it i don't know as  much about but  uh i have had emails from people who  tried to work with aaron janis and try  to support her and were disappointed  because of her  unreliability  and her eccentricity so okay  so daniel i know you don't sympathize  with my point of view  but within the vegan movement  it is really important  that people  see  aaron  for who she really is  you know  maybe she could have a wonderful future  as a recording artist you know as a  creative artist  you know whether or not she's a musician  i mean it's not the only role he can  have in the in the music world you know  maybe she can have a great career that  way  you know  maybe the world would be a better place  if donald trump  had become a game show host  and had just continued working as a game  show host  okay maybe the world would be a better  place if people had known  who donald trump really was and he had  never made the transition  from reality tv  game show host  to  politician  so i i'm of the opinion that donald  trump is morally a bad person  and to say he's eccentric or  unreliable donald trump  how crazy is donald trump on a scale of  one to ten okay  i don't think  it's a problem  for donald trump to be a game show host  for him to work in entertainment i'm not  trying to to get him fired from that job  we're trying to get him banned from  being a game show host right  when donald trump made the transition to  a role of political leadership people  really needed to know  who he was  intellectually  ethically  and emotionally  okay  so daniel i know  fat email back forth i know you don't  sympathize my point of view what i'm  saying here  but part of what i do on my youtube  channel  is to look at people like donald trump  and to look at people who are less  famous but within veganism much more  important like dr greger  neil bernard dr neil bernard those are  just two examples i'm choosing  and they say look  this is who this guy really is  i've found examples of dr greger  lying  about what is in peer-reviewed medical  research and i take that it's not to  hurt  dr greger personally it's not it's not  for some emotional or psychological  reason and i show my audience look if  he's willing to lie about this  how do you know when this guy's telling  the truth really think about it really  think about  who this person is neil bernard same  story i wish i could sit here and tell  you i have a ton of intellectual respect  for neil bernard i don't  and i've caught him lying i've caught  him being really dishonest now he may  tell the truth nine times out of ten but  i don't i don't know  and when you know someone's unreliable  that way you know someone's dishonest  that way  that matters politically it matters then  veganism  and i would say what if you were part of  the catalan independence movement you  were part of the political movement to  make catalonia into a separate country  these kinds of questions may be about  people who have fewer views on youtube  than aaron janus like maybe people who  just have a few thousand views it may  really matter to examine who the  political leaders are who the political  voices are  intellectually ethically emotionally say  look  this is who this person  really is okay  uh  i've never gotten like a lot of email  defending aaron janus i've got to tell  you i i haven't  i've gotten emails from people saying  hey thanks i really appreciate that you  stood up and  said what you said about aaron  after they had their own negative  experiences with her um  but i know a few people have written to  me  basically just expressing incredulity  that they can't believe this is who  aaron really is they can't take my word  for it or they can't take my  my critique of her seriously i  understand that okay  there's a sense in which i think  my ex-wife  will never be able to believe  how abusive she was toward me  because she hasn't seen it on tape  i think my father  was never able to believe  how much he lied to me  because he didn't see anything people  lie to themselves about their behavior  people lie to themselves  i think it's very powerful and very  meaningful to be able to show someone  the recording and say look this is what  you really said this year or anything  they see the tone they hear the tone of  their voice and see the look in their  eyes they see how angry they are they  see  whatever whatever the situation might be  okay so daniel um i know it's  inconvenient for you  and uh you know i don't really even  believe you disagree with me i don't  think you perceive me as crazy you've  made this guy has accused me of being a  coward  wrong answer then he accuses me of not  having any empathy and wrong answer  there's a lot of empathy in all these  videos i have empathy for all these  people i have empathy for my ex-wife  terrible human being i loved her i  supported her for years terrible human  being i got empathy for her my parents  are both terrible human beings i got  empathy for them i do i know what's  wrong with them i know what's right with  them you know we can talk about it with  total detachment i can say this doesn't  mean i don't have i don't have empathy  right um  daniel i don't think you actually  perceive me as a coward or as a  psychopath or someone with no empathy or  anything else i think you don't even  disagree with the argument i'm  presenting here i think it's just  inconvenient for you and you're willing  to say anything to try to twist my arm  into deleting those videos  and i can empathize with your position  too  but by the same token whereby i'm here  saying um  it would be so meaningful for any of  these people themselves to see  the videotape it'd be meaningful for  aaron herself to watch the video and so  on  on some level  you  know my audience would never believe me  if i just gave a description of aaron  janice's behavior  there is no way i could describe this  in poetry or prose that would ever get  across  what can be communicated  so effectively so efficiently in just a  few minutes of primary source  videotape of this person  showing you  who  they really are  and daniel  based on your messages  you're not vegan  if i'm wrong i'm wrong but based on what  you bring to me you seem to be telling  me that you're not vegan you don't care  about the vegan moment you probably  don't care  about politics in cambodia  you probably don't care about politics  in laos you probably don't care about  politics in  uh catalonia a lot of places around the  world right  i just want you to take a moment  to imagine veganism  as if it's a foreign country  it's a small  poor  powerless  foreign country  but the future of veganism  means so much to me  i care about it  so  much  and i actually think it's important for  the whole world on the larger scale and  i think it's important for the quality  of life and for the meaning of life for  the meaning in life  of individual people like i think it  matters on the largest scale and on the  smallest scale  you know  so profoundly  that yeah i think it's  genuinely worthwhile  to come here on camera and say look  this is who you think james aspie is  but here's who he really is okay  this is who you think freely is  this you think durianrider is  this is who  they really are let's  face up to  who the leaders of this movement  have  been  people like  malcolm x  you know they weren't always famous  other people  made them famous  people donated money  to support them  and invited them to sit on stage  you know  today the process is much more  transparent on social media you can see  the process whereby someone like aaron  janus is plucked up  from obscurity  and someone donated a lot of money to  have a billboard campaign and all across  los angeles on huge billboards was aaron  janice's face promoting her youtube  channel and her youtube video you tell  me the cost estimate of that one  advertisement came in how aaron janus  rose to a position of power and  authority is actually much easier to say  than the step-by-step process whereby  malcolm x became a major influential  political leader in the united states  okay  think about how different life in the  united states of america today would be  if it had been someone other than  malcolm x  who'd played that same role  who'd taken on the same position  i'm not going to digress here into the  critique of malcolm x if you don't know  it's dark  mohandas gandhi  some people call him mahatma  what if it had been  some other lawyer  geez  god he was a terrible person i'm sorry  both regarding a religious sense who he  was a religious eccentric  ethically  terrible human being unbelievably awful  influence on the political history of  india both these cases i know you may  not have even read the wikipedia article  let alone done research into exactly the  kind of shocking and horrifying things  about these people that are not in the  wikipedia article well i you know  even looking at gandhi's sex life you  know  it's not i'm not condemning him or  cancelling him just for that reason  that'll start to tell you something i'll  start to show you some of the cracks  in the facade  okay  um  i know  in the short term daniel and you're  you're probably upset by this too  because if your email is telling the  truth you're involved with aaron you're  actually spending time sitting with her  and so i know  i empathize i do  you know  i don't think  history is made  by abstract ideas  i think that history is made  by women  and men  and visibly or invisibly  we  choose  who those people  are  we place our trust in  them  and the vegan movement has accomplished  nothing  in the last five years  because  we  trusted  the wrong  people